
                               1 of 996 DOCUMENTS


                                      IBNS

                       June 25, 2016 Saturday 6:30 AM EST

NASA weighs use of Rover to image potential Mars water sites

BYLINE: India Blooms News Service

LENGTH: 545  words


California, June 25 (IBNS) Ever since it was announced that there may be
evidence of liquid water on present-day Mars, NASA scientists have wondered how
best to further investigate these long, seasonally changing dark streaks in the
hope of finding evidence of life - past or present - on the Red Planet.

Its not as simple as driving a rover to a potential site and taking a scoop of
soil, said Jim Green, NASAs director of planetary science. Not only are these on
steep slopes, we need to ensure that planetary protection concerns are met. In
other words, how can we search for evidence of life without contaminating the
sites with bugs from Earth? Pending approval of a mission extension, NASAs
Curiosity Mars rover will continue to climb to progressively higher and younger
strata on Mount Sharp, investigating how long the ancient, water-rich
environments found so far persisted as Mars dried out. Reaching those
destinations would bring the rover closer to locations where dark streaks are
present on some slopes. On the way, the route would allow the one-ton rover to
capture images of the potential water sites from miles away and see if any are
the seasonally changing type. The features of interest have been observed by
NASAs High-Resolution Imaging Science Experiment (HiRISE) camera on the Mars
Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO). They appear as dark lines that appear to ebb and
flow over time. Planetary scientists think these gullies or recurring slope
lineae (RSLs) may appear seasonally as a form of briny water at or near the
surface of the Red Planet under warmer conditions. There are two RSL candidates
that may be within Curiositys reach, on the side of the 3.1 mile (5 kilometer)
Mount Sharp. The rovers Remote Micro-Imager (part of ChemCam) would be the main
instrument for imaging the possible sites. The goal would be to study the
regions over time to see if there are any changes and to rule out other causes
for the changes, such as dry avalanches, read the NASA website. How close could
the rover safely get to an RSL? Thats exactly the question that needs to be
addressed early in the process, said Catharine Conley, NASAs planetary
protection officer. Kilometers awayits unlikely that it would be an issue. In
terms of coming much closer, we need to understand well in advance the potential
for Earth organisms to come off the rover, and that will tell us how far away
the rover should stay. Conley notes that while the Martian environment is
considered harsh for many organisms, thats not necessarily the case for all of
themparticularly microbes that might be hiding within the nooks and crannies of
a robotic explorer. The darkish streaks are considered special regions on Mars,
where extra precautions must be taken to prevent contamination because of the
suspected presence of liquid water, considered a prerequisite for life. The Mars
Science Laboratory (MSL) spacecraft launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida on
Nov. 26, 2011, arriving on the Red Planet on Aug. 6. 2012. NASAs most ambitious
Mars mission to date, its goal was to study the Martian environment and
determine if Mars is, or was, suitable for life. A decision on the rovers
potential extended mission is expected in the next several months. Image
Credits: NASA/JPL-Caltech/MSSS

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


            Copyright 2016 India Blooms., distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved
